You can run thunder tasks on a custom dataset. All you will need is to prepare a `.yaml` file specifying the config of the dataset and a `.json` file defining the data splits.

!!!note
    A few examples of `.yaml` files describing custom datasets can be found in the `examples` folder of the repository. For examples of `.json` data split files, please check the ones automatically generated by thunder on supported datasets.

!!!note
    Supported formats of custom datasets:
    * **Format 1**: One file per patch (e.g. `.png` files). Your data split `.json` file will then contain paths to these files along with labels associated to them. This is the most common format in our already supported datasets.
    * **Format 2**: Following the format of *patch_camelyon*, for each split (train, val, test), one `.h5` file with a `x` key mapping to an array of input images and another `.h5` file with a `y` key mapping to an array of associated labels. Your data split `.json` file will then contain paths to these `.h5` files (images and labels).

For example, we can create a custom version of the *bracs* dataset with 3 classes instead of 7. The `.yaml` file would be as follows:

```
dataset_name: bracs_3classes
nb_classes: 3
compatible_tasks: ["adversarial_attack", "alignment_scoring", "image_retrieval", "knn", "linear_probing", "pre_computing_embeddings", "simple_shot", "zero_shot_vlm"]
nb_train_samples: 3657
nb_val_samples: 312
nb_test_samples: 570
mpp: 0.25
cancer_type: breast
div_patches: False
data_splits: /path/to/data/splits/file.json
classes: ["benign", "atypical", "malignant"]
class_to_id:
  benign: 0
  atypical: 1
  malignant: 2
id_to_class:
  0: benign
  1: atypical
  2: malignant
id_to_classname:
  0: normal breast tissue
  1: breast atypical lesions
  2: breast malingnant tumor
```
This was an example of a custom dataset where patches are saved as images (**Format 1**). If you want instead to use a custom dataset with the same format as *patch_camelyon* (**Format 2**), you should add the `h5_format: True` entry to your `.yaml` file.

The `.json` file will have the following structure if data follows **Format 1**:
```
{
    "train": {
        "images": [/path/to/im0, ..., /path/to/imN], 
        "labels": [label_im0, ..., label_imN],
    }, 
    "val": {
        "images": [...], 
        "labels": [...],
    }, 
    "test": {
        "images": [...], 
        "labels": [...],
    }, 
    "train_few_shot": {
        ...,
    },
}
```

If data follows **Format 2**, it will be:
```
{
    "train": {
        "images": /path/to/train/images/file.h5, 
        "labels": /path/to/train/labels/file.h5,
    },
    "val": {
       "images": /path/to/val/images/file.h5, 
        "labels": /path/to/val/labels/file.h5,
    },
    "test": {
        "images": /path/to/test/images/file.h5, 
        "labels": /path/to/test/labels/file.h5,
    }, 
    "train_few_shot": {
        ...,
    },
}
```

In both cases, for a classification dataset, `labels` will be a list of integers (classes) and for a segmentation dataset, it will be a list of tuples `(/path/to/the/gt/semnatic/mask/, patch_i_min_coord, patch_i_max_coord, patch_j_min_coord, patch_j_max_coord)`.

The `train_few_shot` entry is mapped to a dictionnary where keys are sizes of support sets ("1", "2", "4", "8", "16") and values are dictionnaries with entries `images` and `labels`, respectively mapping to the indices of images in the support set and their respective labels. For more details, please check the [function](https://github.com/MICS-Lab/thunder/blob/main/src/thunder/datasets/data_splits.py#L259-L291) where we automatically create such support sets for supported datasets.

!!!note
    Importantly, you have two ways to specify paths to images (and labels in case of h5 format):
    * You **do not** provide a `base_data_folder` entry in your `.yaml` file and paths specified in the `.json` file will be **absolute** paths.
    * You provide a `base_data_folder` entry in your `.yaml` file. This should be **the path to a folder containing a sub-folder named `dataset_name`** (e.g. here named *bracs_3classes*). The paths in your `.json` will be specified relative to this `base_data_folder/dataset_name` folder (as done for supported datasets). 

With your `.yaml` file ready (e.g. `bracs_3classes.yaml`) along with the corresponding `.json` file, you can run any benchmark task on any model using the following command:

```console
thunder benchmark model_name custom:/path/to/bracs_3classes.yaml task_name
```

or through the API:

```python
from thunder import benchmark

if __name__ == "__main__":
    benchmark("uni2h", dataset="custom:/path/to/bracs_3classes.yaml", task="linear_probing")
```
